.TH FAST-VM 8 "configure-fast-vm 1.6 (2020-05-04)" "fast-vm" "configure-fast-vm" \" -*- nroff -*-
.SH NAME
configure-fast-vm \(em script for (re)configuring fast-vm
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B configure-fast-vm
.br

.SH DESCRIPTION
configure-fast-vm is used to setup the fast-vm environment or to change its configuration.
Script is interactive and will ask series of question regarding fast-vm providing current or
default values (default values are provided when no configuration exists).

It is save to interrupt script and run it again. 

.BR configure-fast-vm " needs to be run as root, but it will ask before altering configuration of system."
.RB "fast-vm is intended to be run by normal users in system group defined by variable " FASTVM_GROUP "."
.RB "For more information check the " fast-vm.conf " (5)."

This script is able to create the thinpool LV needed for LV storage and it can also
define the libvirt network for fast-vm. Template for libvirt network is in file
.IR /usr/share/fast-vm/fast-vm-network.xml .

Additionally this script can either 'generate' system-wide libguestfs appliance or 'import' one by downloading it from 
.IR http://ftp.linux.cz/pub/linux/people/ondrej_famera/fastvm-images/appliance-1.39.11.tar.xz .
Import of appliance is recommended unless there is no access to Internet from machine running fast-vm.

.SH LIBGUESTFS APPLIANCE CAPABILITIES
Appliances imported into /var/lib/fast-vm/appliance can additionally contain files denoting their capabilities that might be needed by some hack files. Below is recommended naming for these capabilities with explanations on what they mean:

- capability_xfs_el8 - appliance can mount read/write the XFS filesystem created by EL8 systems

- capability_btrfs - appliance can mount read/write BTRFS filesystem

.SH MANUALLY GENERATING APPLIANCE ON FEDORA SYSTEMS
Make sure that you have packages 'libguestfs-devel' and 'libvirt' installed and that libvirtd.service is running. Then generate appliance archive with command 'libguestfs-make-fixed-appliance --xz'. Note that system should have at least 2GB of RAM (systems with 1GB RAM often fails to complete the generation successfully).

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR fast-vm.conf (5),
.BR fast-vm (8)
