.TH FAST-VM.CONF 5 "fast-vm 1.7 (2020-05-04)" "fast-vm" "/etc/fast-vm.conf" \" -*- nroff -*-
.SH NAME
fast-vm.conf \(em global configuration file for fast-vm located in /etc/fast-vm.conf

.SH DESCRIPTION
.RB "This manual page describes the format of the " fast-vm " (8) configuration file."

The /etc/fast-vm.conf must exist so fast-vm can function properly. During first configuration the default
.RI "values are taken from file " /usr/share/fast-vm/fast-vm.conf.defaults .

.IR /etc/fast-vm.conf " is loaded during each fast-vm command run and provides it with needed variables."

Following variables are defined and used by fast-vm:

.TP
.B VM_PREFIX
Prefix for LV disk name and libvirt machine name.

.TP 
.B THINPOOL_VG
Name of LVM Volume Group (VG) on which the thin LV for fast-vm is located.

.TP
.B THINPOOL_LV
LVM Logical Volume (LV) name of thinpool used for fast-vm.

.TP
.B LIBVIRT_NETWORK
Name of the libvirt network that will be used by fast-vm for NAT networking. Bridge for this network will have same name as the network.

.TP
.B SUBNET_NUMBER
The XX in the 192.168.XX.0/24 libvirt network created by setup. 

.TP
.B FASTVM_GROUP
System group which will be allowed access to fast-vm. Users in this group can use fast-vm
and fast-vm will allow access to VM disks for this group (prior to version 0.9 this was a 'libvirt' group).
If you setup this to other group than 'libvirt' you would most probably need to allow RW access for
this group to libvirt RW socket. Usually this can be done by changing following two options in
.BR /etc/libvirt/libvirtd.conf ". Please note that changes below disable default polkit authentication."
.sp
.BI "unix_sock_group = " "<new_group>"
.sp
.BI "auth_unix_rw =  " "none"

.TP
.B LOG_LEVEL
Defines the minimum priority of messages that will be logged to syslog. Default is 7 (debug = all messages)

.TP
.B DISPLAY_LEVEL
Defines the minimum priority of messages that will be showed when running fast-vm. Default is 7 (debug = all messages)

.TP
.B FASTVM_NOTES_DIR (DEPRECATED) - can be removed from config file

.TP
.B FASTVM_OWNER_ONLY_DELETE
Allow only 'root' and VM 'owner' to delete VM. In fast-vm versions =< 0.9 all users able to use fast-vm can delete any fast-vm VM. Default is 
.BR no ". To enable this behaviour set this to " yes .
WARNING: This is not a security feature and aims only at preventing accidental deletes of machines not owned by users.
Any user with access to qemu:///system can at any time delete any VM unless other measures are implemented.

.TP
.B FASTVM_KEYDIST_PASSWORD
System-wide default password that is attempted first in fast-vm keydist operation. If removed or set to empty string then fast-vm keydist will always ask for password from user.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR fast-vm (8),
.BR configure-fast-vm (8)
