.TH FAST-VM-IMAGE 8 "fast-vm-image 1.6 (2020-05-04)" "fast-vm-image" "fast-vm-image" \" -*- nroff -*-
.SH NAME
fast-vm-image \(em script managing image and profiles for fast-vm
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B fast-vm-image
.RB <action>
.RB <options>

.B fast-vm-image
.BR import
.IR ImageName
.RB < empty
.RI | PathToImage >
.IR PathToLibvirtXML
.RI [ PathToHacksFile ]
.RI [ PathToDeleteHacksFile ]

.B fast-vm-image
.BR import_custom
.IR ImageSizeInGiB
.IR ImageName
.RB < empty
.RI | PathToImage >
.IR PathToLibvirtXML
.RI [ PathToHacksFile ]
.RI [ PathToDeleteHacksFile ]

.B fast-vm-image
.BR export
.IR ImageName
.RB "[ <" zst | xz | gz "> ]"

.B fast-vm-image
.BR remove
.IR ImageName

.B fast-vm-image
.BR resize
.IR ImageName
.IR NewImageSizeInGiB

.B fast-vm-image
.BR import_profile
.IR ProfileName
.IR ImageName
.IR PathToLibvirtXML 
.RI [ PathToHacksFile ]
.RI [ PathToDeleteHacksFile ]

.B fast-vm-image
.BR remove_profile
.IR ProfileName

.B fast-vm-image
.BR list
.RB [ short ]

.B fast-vm-image
.BR list_profiles
.RB [ short ]

.B fast-vm-image
.B compact
.IR "ImageName"

.B fast-vm-image
.BR verify
.IR ImageName
.RI [ PathToCheksumsDir ]

.B fast-vm-image
.BR gen_checksums
.IR ImageName

.SH DESCRIPTION
While fast-vm provides the easy script for creating VMs based on images, the fast-vm-image takes
care of image operations including their creation, changes and export. When starting to use the
fast-vm you will need 'Image' that will be used to create VMs. You can either get prebuild images
as described in GETTING IMAGES section or you can create your own one by following procedure in
the CREATING CUSTOM IMAGES section. Originally image management functionality
was part of the fast-vm script and was moved into separate command for clarity. It is expected that
fast-vm-images will be used much less than fast-vm command in day-to-day operations.

.SH GETTING IMAGES

To get prebuild images you can visit https://www.famera.cz/blog/fast-vm/image_list.html .

.SH OPTIONS

.TP
.B ImageName
.RB "Name of image imported in the fast-vm. It should contain only alpha-numerical characters. " "ImageName"
is part of the LV name and libvirt machine name.

.TP
.B ProfileName
.BR "ProfileName" " is used when using existing " "ImageName" " with alternative XML and hack files. Check " "IMAGE PROFILES" " for more details"

.TP
.B PathToImage
.BI "PathToImage " /path/to/image.{gz,xz,zst}
.br
.BI "PathToImage " http://url/to/image.{gz,xz,zst}
.sp
Local path or http/https URL to image file in GZIP, XZ or ZST format. From fast-vm-1.2 if the filename of image matches regular
expression "[0-9]+g__" then the number before 'g' is used as the image size that will be imported (this can be overridden by
.RB "using the " "import_custom" " action of " "fast-vm-image" ")."
By default fast-vm assumes size of image to be 10GB.

.TP
.B PathToLibvirtXML
.BI "PathToLibvirtXML " /path/to/libvirt.xml
.br
.BI "PathToLibvirtXML " http://url/to/libvirt.xml
.sp
Local path or http/https URL to libvirt VM XML template. Check the
.B TEMPLATE MACROS
in fast-vm-image man page for list of supported macros in the VM XML template.

.TP
.B PathToHacksFile
.BI "PathToHacksFile " /path/to/hacks.sh
.br
.BI "PathToHacksFile " http://url/to/hacks.sh
.sp
Local path or http/https URL to shell script which will be executed after creation of the VM and is allowed
to access the disk drive of the VM before it is run for the first time. It usually contains customization such as
change of hostname, setting of timezone to match hypervisor or configuration of serial console.

.TP
.B PathToDeleteHacksFile
.BI "PathToDeleteHacksFile " /path/to/delete-hacks.sh
.br
.BI "PathToDeleteHacksFile " http://url/to/delete-hacks.sh
.sp
Local path or http/https URL to shell script which will be executed during VM delete process as last step
before the VM is undefined from the libvirt.

.TP
.B PathToCheksumsDir
.BI "PathToCheksumsDir " /path/to/checksums/dir/
.br
.BI "PathToCheksumsDir " http://url/to/checksums/dir/
.sp
Local path or http/https URL to directory containing checksums against which the image integrity can be verified.
.RB "Check the " "IMAGE CHECKSUM GENERATION AND VERIFICATION" " for more information."

.SH TEMPLATE MACROS
In the libvirt XML and hack files you can use variables from 
.BR fast-vm.conf (5)
and additionally the macros below. Try to avoid using other variables than ones listed here. 
Feel free to open issue against fast-vm project to discuss if any new variable can be added.

.TP
.B IMAGE_NAME
.RI "Contains value of " ImageName "."

.TP
.B VM_NUMBER
.RI "Contains value of " VmNumber "."

.TP
.B VM_HEX_NUMBER
.RI "Contains value of " VmNumber " in hexadecival format."

.TP
.B VM_NAME
Name of the VM composed from 
.BR "VM_PREFIX IMAGE_NAME VM_NUMBER" .

.TP
.B VM_MAC
.br
MAC address assigned to VM. This can be used only as variable in HackFile.

.SH CREATING CUSTOM IMAGES
Currently fast-vm expects that all images are 10GB in size (this can change in future).
Below is recommended procedure for creating your custom images.
.TP
.B 1. Create libvirt VM XML template
If you are unsure about the template get some inspiration in the fast-vm-public-images repository and feel free to reuse the template
files from there. You can change template later to suit your needs. Here are some guidelines for creating a good libvirt XML:
.nf
.RB "\(bu Use " "TEMPLATE MACROS" " to describe paths and names. Avoid hardcoding path to single drive to prevent concurrent access to it."
\(bu Remove the exact hardware addresses where possible to let the destination libvirt decide where the devices should be assigned.
.fi

.TP
.B 2. Name your custom image and import "empty image" with the libvirt XML
The custom image in this example will be named 'cool_image' and libvirt XML file wil have name cool_image.xml

.B fast-vm-image import cool_image empty cool_image.xml

or import empty image with custom size (in example below 6GB)

.B fast-vm-image import_custom 6 cool_image empty cool_image.xml

.TP
.B 3. Create base VM and prepare your custom image
This will create the "base VM" which will use the empty drive directly.

.B fast-vm create cool_image base

Now you will have a VM with empty disk drive and you can install any system you want to become your custom image.
To make image as small as possible try to remove unnecessary things from the VM such as cache files, logs. If the OS supports it,
try to use TRIM (ATA devices) or UNMAP (SCSI devices) commands to further reduce size. For example try command
.BR fstrim .

You can further try to cleanup image using the command
.BI "fast-vm-image compact " "ImageName"
.RB "which cleans up image is using " "virt-sparsify" " command."

.TP
.B 4. Export image in compressed form
When you have done all modification to your image export it to GZ, XZ or ZST (recommended) compressed file using one of the commands below.

.B fast-vm-image export cool_image zst
.br
.B fast-vm-image export cool_image xz
.br
.B fast-vm-image export cool_image gz

TIP: You can test anytime your image by creating fast-vm VM based on it. Note that changing base VM disk will NOT change existing fast-vm VM that is using that image. In other words: changing file in base VM doesn't affect existing VMs, only newly created ones.

.B fast-vm create cool_image VmNumber

.TP
.B 5. (optional, but recommended) Creating hack file
Hack files allows one to change things in the image at the time when new fast-vm VM is created.
This is heavilly used by fast-vm images from fast-vm-public-images to setup the hostname of the machine so it matches the fast-vm VM_NAME as much as possible. 
Check those hack files for inspiration on what is possible. Note that hack files are run in context of
user running the fast-vm command and they don't have root permissions.

.SH CUSTOMIZING IMPORTED IMAGE
You can further customize the disk image imported into fast-vm thinpool. This is practical if you are for example importing some systems that requires
registration or some other repetitive task that is hard to put into hacks file. However if something is possible doable in hack file, then hack file is the
recommended way of customizing image because hack files are easier to ditribute compared to whole disk images.
To begin customizing imported image create the 'base' VM using command below.
.BR "NOTE: " "Customizing image will change data checksum of the image."

.BI "fast-vm create " ImageName " base"

Above command will define VM which will be able to directly alter the imported disk image. The VM will be created using default libvirt XML associated with that image
and fast-vm will apply hacks file on it as on normal VM. However as the 'base' is not a number, the VM will not be assigned the static DHCP lease by libvirt so it might
be needed to connect to VM by other means that through network to figure out its IP address or assign it one.

It is save to alter imported image after you have created fast-vm VMs that are based on it. The changes you do to the imported image will be present only
in the newly created VMs. It's strongly discouraged to create VMs based on imported image when the base VM is running.

.SH UEFI SUPPORT (from fast-vm-1.0)
To use virtual machines with UEFI you will need a UEFI firmware for qemu which is most probably distributed separately from qemu.
When creating the custom image you will have to specify location of UEFI firmware and provide the location of UEFI variable files in
.RI " " "/etc/libvirt/qemu.conf" " file so the libvirt can automatically take care of UEFI vars creation and deletion."
Some systems (such as CentOS/RHEL 6.x) needs UEFI vars file that contains needed variables after install to be bootable.

.SH IMAGE PROFILES (from fast-vm-1.1)
To allow re-use of same disk image with different libvirt XML and/or hack files the IMAGE PROFILES can be used. Profile is basically alternative libvirt XML and/or hack file
for existing disk image. Profiles can be specified in place of ImageName. To create profile there must be already existing image based on which profile is created.
Typical use of profile is to create VM with different virtual HW (more RAM, CPU, additional network cards, etc.).

.SH RESIZING DISKS (from fast-vm-1.2)
Resizing the image disk will affect only newly created VMs from that disk. Disks should be resized only when base VM is turned off. Note that this action resizes only the disk drive and not partitions or filesystems on disk.
.br
.BR "WARNING: " "Shrinking disk size (making size of disk smaller) can cause DATA LOSS. Think before doing so. You will NOT be prompted to confirm your choice."

.SH IMAGE CHECKSUM GENERATION AND VERIFICATION (from fast-vm-1.7)
By default the checksums are not generated, but are verified if the checksum files are present.

Fast-vm is now able to generate and verify the imported image parts using SHA512 checksums. When generating checksums, the already imported, image is split into 1GB parts and for each part the checksum is generated. Note that last part of image could be smaller than 1 GB and checksum will be made only from this remainder - it will NOT be padded to whole 1GB.

When importing the image or when requesting verification manually via 'verify' operation each checksum file is checked against the imported image part and compared. If all checksum files were present and image was not changed (or resized) then verification should succeed. If any of the checksum files is missing or image was extended beyond the size of original image that had checksums created, then verification can report 'missing' checksums.

Idea of checksumming of images is to provide convenient method to detect if image was imported properly or that it was not modified later after import. This is first implementation of this generation and checking that is serializing both checksum generation and verification, future versions may switch to paralele checking and verification for faster operation.

.SH EXAMPLES
Import local image into fast-vm
.sp
.BI "fast-vm-image import " "6.7 /tmp/centosl6.7.img.gz /tmp/centos-6.3\-7.2.xml /tmp/centos\-7\-hacks.sh"

.RB "Define new profile " "small-6.7" " based on image " "6.7" " with custom libvirt XML and hack files and create machine " "41" " using new profile"
.sp
.BI "fast-vm-image import " "small-6.7 6.7 /tmp/alternative\-libvirt.xml /tmp/custom\-create\-hacks.sh /tmp/custom\-delete\-hacks.sh"
.br
.BI "fast-vm create " "small-6.7 41"

.RB "Change disk size of image " "small-6.7" " to " "40" " GB. All VMs created from this image after this change will have disk with " "40" " GB. Previously created VM are unaffected."
.sp
.BI "fast-vm-image resize " "small-67 40"

.SH EXIT CODES
In case of error the fast-vm-image will return non-zero exit code. 

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR fast-vm (8),
.BR fast-vm.conf (5),
.BR configure-fast-vm (8),
.BR fast-vm-list (8)
