CONTRIBUTING.md, before:

## Contributing to fast-vm
Here is list of general guidelines on how to contribute to this repository.

In case that you don't have/dont't want to use GitHub you can send any concern/issue/request via email to ondrej-xa2iel8u@famera.cz.

### Fixing documentation/man pages/README/ typo in text/...
Create directly PR (pull Request) against `master` branch. Unless there is some substantial(big) change this will get merged very quickly.

### Reporting bad/wrong/unexpected behaviour of fast-vm
In most cases open **Issue** on GitHub and describe at minimum your environment, version of fast-vm that you are using and behaviour that you see (observed vs expected).
If you feel that you know where to fix/change the behaviour in the code feel free to open **PR (Pull request)**.
If you would like to fix the issue but not sure how, please open the **Issue** so behaviour can be discussed and possibly later fixed via PR.

### Request for new functionality
Iddeally open **Issue** describing feature that you would like to have in fast-vm and short explanation on how this feature improves fast-vm.
If you happen to already have some code prepared for the feature that you have used, feel free to open **PR (pull request)** agains `master` branch.

### Hosting the pre-build fast-vm images
If you would like to host fast-vm images on your server Contact the author via email ondrej-xa2iel8u@famera.cz. 

### working on Issues marked as 'help wanted'
Before starting to work on such issue either comment into issue that you plan working on it or send emall with your intention to work on Issue.

### Creating articles about fast-vm
Write email to auther or create Issue on github with link to your article. Link to your article can be featured on page https://www.famera.cz/blog/fast-vm/ .

### Translation of fast-vm documentation
If you are interested in translating the fast-vm documentation please contact me via email - ondrej-xa2iel8u@famera.cz.

## Thank you
In any case of contribution or feedback to fast-vm **Thank you!**

Commit message:

document setup of test environment = fast-vm on fast-vm

CONTRIBUTING.md, after:

## Setting up test environment for fast-vm
Check the [tests/test_environment_setup/README.md](tests/test_environment_setup/README.md) for more details.

## Contributing to fast-vm
Here is list of general guidelines on how to contribute to this repository.

In case that you don't have/dont't want to use GitHub you can send any concern/issue/request via email to ondrej-xa2iel8u@famera.cz.

### Fixing documentation/man pages/README/ typo in text/...
Create directly PR (pull Request) against `master` branch. Unless there is some substantial(big) change this will get merged very quickly.

### Reporting bad/wrong/unexpected behaviour of fast-vm
In most cases open **Issue** on GitHub and describe at minimum your environment, version of fast-vm that you are using and behaviour that you see (observed vs expected).
If you feel that you know where to fix/change the behaviour in the code feel free to open **PR (Pull request)**.
If you would like to fix the issue but not sure how, please open the **Issue** so behaviour can be discussed and possibly later fixed via PR.

### Request for new functionality
Iddeally open **Issue** describing feature that you would like to have in fast-vm and short explanation on how this feature improves fast-vm.
If you happen to already have some code prepared for the feature that you have used, feel free to open **PR (pull request)** agains `master` branch.

### Hosting the pre-build fast-vm images
If you would like to host fast-vm images on your server Contact the author via email ondrej-xa2iel8u@famera.cz. 

### Working on Issues marked as 'help wanted'
Before starting to work on such issue either comment into issue that you plan working on it or send emall with your intention to work on Issue.

### Creating articles about fast-vm
Write email to auther or create Issue on github with link to your article. Link to your article can be featured on page https://www.famera.cz/blog/fast-vm/ .

### Translation of fast-vm documentation
If you are interested in translating the fast-vm documentation please contact me via email - ondrej-xa2iel8u@famera.cz.

## Thank you
In any case of contribution or feedback to fast-vm **Thank you!**
